Quantum Networking and Security
CS 518
Lecture 1
Prof M Rahman

1

Overview- Quantum Networking: Teleportation

• “Teleportation” is a magic word, exotic and evocative,
but it has been appearing in serious technical literature with
increasing frequency.

Quantum networking/ Internet
Classical
Channel

• Both theoretically fascinating and experimentally demonstrated,
teleportation is the key to quantum networks

A

Quantum
Channel

B

• .Only the quantum state moves

2

Quantum Networking/Internet
❑ Basics
•

Quantum networks for computation

•

Quantum networks for communication

•

Overview of the elements of a quantum network

❑ Elements of a quantum network
•

End nodes: quantum processors

•

Communication lines: physical layer

•

3

•

Fiber optic networks

•

Free space network

Repeaters
•

Trusted repeaters

•

Quantum repeaters

•

Error correction

•

Entanglement purification

Quantum network uses Quantum computers
❑ Applications
•

Secure communications

❑ Current status
•

Quantum Internet

•

Quantum networks of computation

•

Experimental quantum models

•

Mobile quantum network

•

QKD networks

Why Quantum Computing
• Moore’s Law: transistors
double every 2 year
• Slowing down
• Transistors cannot be
made smaller – laws of
quantum mechanics start
to take over
• Post-silicon era
4

Why Quantum Computing

Computer technology is making
devices smaller and smaller…
…reaching a point where classical
physics is no longer a suitable
model for the laws of physics.

kT log(2)

5

Limitations of Classical Computers
• RSA encryption (2048-bit)
• 100,000 computers in parallel
• 3 GHz processors
• Factoring would take longer than the
age of the universe

• Quantum simulation: inefficient with
classical computers
• Feynman: why not use quantum
mechanics for computation?
6

Quantum Computing Pioneers
• Yuri Manin (1937- ), mathematician
• 1980: First to propose the idea of the quantum computer

• Paul Benioff (1930- ), physicist
• 1980: Described quantum mechanical models of computers

• Richard Feynman (1918-1988), physicist
• 1981: Presented a logical quantum computer model
• Demonstrated that a quantum system cannot be simulated
with a classic computer
• Demonstrated that the traditional approach to computer
development would never lead to a revolution
7

Quantum Mechanics developed in 1927
by the world’s greatest physicists

8

Quantum Mechanics developed in 1927
by the world’s greatest physicists
Schrodinger
Pauli Heisenberg

Debye

Dirac

Bragg
Langmuir

Planck

Curie

Lorentz

Compton

Einstein

de Broglie

Born
Bohr
Wilson

Richardson

9

A History of Quantum Computing
1935

1964

1970

1981

1982

The EPR
Paradox

Bell’s
Inequality

Birth of quantum
information theory

First conference on
physics of computation

Discovery of
topological
quantum order

Quantum
cryptography

1984

1993
Circuit QED is
demonstrated

2006 12
2007

2001

2000

1998

7

2

2004 Experimentally

1997
Topological
codes

factoring 15

The transmon
superconducting
qubit

2008 28

2012

2015

1996

1995

2017

50
Coherence time
improvement
Qubits in existing quantum computers

Demonstrate
simple error
correction code

1994

DiVincenzo Criteria Quantum error
for building a
correction
quantum computer

2016
IBM makes quantum
computing available
on IBM Cloud

Quantum
teleportation

Shor’s Factoring
Algorithm

2019
53

IBM launches
commercial universal
quantum computing

Google develops
quantum computer
10

53 qubit Google’s Sycamore Quantum Computer

53 qubit Google’s Sycamore Quantum Computer ; 23 Oct , 2019

Google’s Quantum Supremacy

53 qubit Google’s Sycamore Quantum Computer ; 23 Oct , 2019

Quantum Networking/Internet
❑ Basics
•

Quantum networks for computation

•

Quantum networks for communication

•

Overview of the elements of a quantum network

❑ Elements of a quantum network
•

End nodes: quantum processors

•

Communication lines: physical layer

•

13

•

Fiber optic networks

•

Free space network

Repeaters
•

Trusted repeaters

•

Quantum repeaters

•

Error correction

•

Entanglement purification

Quantum network uses Quantum computers
❑ Applications
•

Secure communications

❑ Current status
•

Quantum Internet

•

Quantum networks of computation

•

Experimental quantum models

•

Mobile quantum network

•

QKD networks

From top to bottom, the system gradually
cools from four Kelvin -- liquid-helium
temperatures -- to 800 milliKelvin,
100 milliKelvin and, finally, 10 milliKelvin.
Inside the canister where the chip is, that's 10
thousandths of a degree above absolute zero
14

Technical Summary
Classical
Bit

Computer
Quantum
Quantum Computing Essential
Ingredients

Quantum Networking

Qubit

Teleportation

Science

Physics

Superposition

Entanglement

EPR Qubit Pair

Quantum Processor
Quantum Channel

Classical Channel
Quantum Internet
Classical
Channel

A

15

Quantum
Channel

B

Overview- Quantum Networking: Teleportation
• “Teleportation” is a magic word, exotic and evocative,
but it has been appearing in serious technical literature with
increasing frequency.
• Both theoretically fascinating and experimentally demonstrated,
teleportation is the key to quantum networks
• When used in discussions about quantum information,
teleportation refers not to Captain Kirk stepping into a machine on
the starship Enterprise, dissolving and reappearing on a planet’s
surface, but to an operation in which a quantum variable dissolves
here and reappears there, on a different physical device. Only the
quantum state moves; the electron or other physical device
remains where it was, and the receiver can in fact be a very
different form of physical device than the sender. The quantum
state is destroyed at the sender in the process.
• Classical networks communicate by physically copying data and
transmitting the copy, but the rules of quantum mechanics forbid
the creation of independent copies of an unknown, arbitrary
quantum state. Instead of risking the loss of valuable, fragile
quantum data by directly transmitting our only copy, networks will
prepare generic states that are used to teleport data or to perform
teleportation-derived operations on the data.

16

Overview- Quantum Networking: Teleportation
• Quantum networks bring new capabilities to
communication systems. Quantum physical effects
can be used to detect eavesdropping, to improve the
share sensitivity of separated astronomical
instruments or to create distributed states that will
enable numerical quantum computation over a
distance using teleportation.
• Quantum communication is the exchange of
quantum states over a distance, generally requiring
the support of substantial classical communication.
• The quantum states that are exchanged may be
“standalone” states, an individual element of
quantum data. They may also be part of a larger
quantum state, spanning devices or even network
nodes in a way no shared classical state can. These
latter states we refer to as entangled states, which we
will study extensively in this course
17

Quantum Networking- Teleportation

18

Quantum Networking

19

Overview (Cont..)

• Applications running on classical computers will use
these quantum states to accomplish one of the above
tasks. The classical computer is connected to a quantum
device, which may do no more than measure the quantum
states to find a classical value (such as a bit of a secret
key), or may store them for use in more complex quantum
computers.
• A classical computer will treat a quantum computer as
a type of coprocessor; likewise, the classical computer will
see the quantum network through the eyes of a separate
device.
• Because quantum data is fragile and some quantum
operations are probabilistic, errors and distributed
calculations must be managed aggressively and perhaps
cooperatively among nodes. Solutions to these problems
will have both similarities to and differences from purely
classical networks.
• Architectures for large-scale quantum networking and
internetworking are in development, paralleling
theoretical and experimental work on physical layers and
low-level error management and connection technologies.
Unentangled quantum networks have already been
deployed, starting in the early 2000s; as of early 2014,
entangled networks are not yet deployed, but may appear
within the next few years and will form a vibrant research
topic in the coming decade.
20

Quantum Internet/Networking
❖ The quantum internet- a network interconnecting
remote quantum devices through quantum links in
synergy with classical ones –is envisioned as the final
stage of the quantum revolution, opening
fundamentally new communications and computing
capabilities.
• Quantum networks form an important element
of quantum computing and quantum
communication systems.
• Quantum networks facilitate the transmission of
information in the form of quantum bits, also called qubits,
between physically separated quantum processors.
• A quantum processor is a small quantum computer
being able to perform quantum logic gates on a certain
number of qubits.
• Quantum networks work in a similar way to classical
networks. The main difference is that quantum
networking, like quantum computing, is better at solving
certain problems, such as modeling quantum systems.
21

21

Quantum networks for computation
• Quantum networks for computation
• Networked quantum computing or distributed quantum computing[1][2] works by linking
multiple quantum processors through a quantum network by sending qubits in between them
• Doing this creates a quantum computing cluster and therefore creates more computing
potential. Less powerful computers can be linked in this way to create one more powerful
processor.
• This is analogous to connecting several classical computers to form a computer cluster in
classical computing
• Like classical computing, this system is scalable by adding more and more quantum
computers to the network
• Currently, quantum processors are only separated by short distances.
22

Quantum Communication
• In the realm of quantum communication, one wants to send qubits from one
quantum processor to another over long distances.[3]
• This way, local quantum networks can be intra-connected into a quantum internet.
• A quantum internet[1] supports many applications, which derive their power from the fact that
by creating quantum entangled qubits, information can be transmitted between the remote
quantum processors.
• Most applications of a quantum internet require only very modest quantum processors. For
most quantum internet protocols, such as quantum key distribution in quantum cryptography, it
is sufficient if these processors are capable of preparing and measuring only a single qubit at a
time.
• This is in contrast to quantum computing where interesting applications can only be realized if
the (combined) quantum processors can easily simulate more qubits than a classical computer
(around 60[4]).
• Quantum internet applications require only small quantum processors, often just a single qubit,
because quantum entanglement can already be realized between just two qubits.
• A simulation of an entangled quantum system on a classical computer cannot simultaneously
provide the same security and speed.
23

Quantum Internet/Networking
• The Quantum Internet – a
network
interconnecting
remote quantum devices
through quantum links in
synergy with classical ones
• The quantum internet is a
network that lets quantum
devices
exchange
information
within
an
environment that harnesses
the weird laws of quantum
mechanics.

➢ Quantum network uses
Quantum computers

24

Quantum Networking
• Unsurprisingly, qubits cannot be used to send the kind of data we are familiar with, like emails and
WhatsApp messages.
• But the strange behavior of qubits is opening up huge opportunities in other, more niche
applications.
• QUANTUM (SAFER) COMMUNICATIONS
• One of the most exciting avenues that researchers, armed with qubits, are exploring, is security.
• When it comes to classical communications, most data is secured by distributing a shared key to
the sender and receiver and then using this common key to encrypt the message. The receiver
can then use their key to decode the data at their end.

Quantum Networking:
QKD
• Measuring causes the state of the qubit to collapse,
but it is the value that is read out during the
measurement process that is important. The qubit, in
a way, is only there to transport the key value.
• More importantly, QKD means that it is easy to find
out whether a third party has eavesdropped on the
qubits during the transmission since the intruder
would have caused the key to collapse simply by
looking at it.
• If a hacker looked at the qubits at any point while
they were being sent, this would automatically
change the state of the qubits. A spy would inevitably
leave behind a sign of eavesdropping – which is why
cryptographers maintain that QKD is "provably"
secure.

Quantum Networking:
QKD
•

SO, WHY A QUANTUM INTERNET?
•

QKD technology is in its very early stages. The "usual" way to create QKD at the
moment consists of sending qubits in a one-directional way to the receiver, through
optic-fiber cables; but those significantly limit the effectiveness of the protocol.

•

Qubits can easily get lost or scattered in a fiber-optic cable, which means that
quantum signals are very much error-prone, and struggle to travel long distances.
Current experiments, in fact, are limited to a range of hundreds of kilometers.

•

There is another solution, and it is the one that underpins the quantum internet: to
leverage another property of quantum, called entanglement, to communicate
between two devices.

•

When two qubits interact and become entangled, they share particular properties
that depend on each other.

•

•

While the qubits are in an entangled state, any change to one particle in the
pair will result in changes to the other, even if they are physically separated.

•

The state of the first qubit, therefore, can be "read" by looking at the
behavior of its entangled counterpart. That's right: even Albert Einstein
called the whole thing "spooky action at a distance".

And in the context of quantum communication, entanglement could in effect,
teleport some information from one qubit to its entangled other half, without the
need for a physical channel bridging the two during the transmission.

Quantum Networking:
Entanglement
•

HOW DOES ENTANGLEMENT WORK?
•

The very concept of teleportation entails, by definition, the lack of a physical
network bridging between communicating devices. But it remains that
entanglement needs to be created in the first place, and then maintained.

•

To carry out QKD using entanglement, it is necessary to build the appropriate
infrastructure to first create pairs of entangled qubits, and then distribute
them between a sender and a receiver. This creates the "teleportation"
channel over which cryptography keys can be exchanged.

•

Specifically, once the entangled qubits have been generated, you have to send
half of the pair to the receiver of the key. An entangled qubit can travel
through networks of optic fiber, for example; but those are unable to
maintain entanglement after about 60 miles.

•

Qubits can also be kept entangled over large distances via satellite, but
covering the planet with outer-space quantum devices is expensive.

•

There are still huge engineering challenges, therefore, to building large-scale
"teleportation networks" that could effectively link up qubits across the world.
Once the entanglement network is in place, the magic can start: linked qubits
won't need to run through any form of physical infrastructure anymore to
deliver their message.

•

During transmission, therefore, the quantum key would virtually be invisible
to third parties, impossible to intercept, and reliably "teleported" from one
endpoint to the next. The idea will resonate well with industries that deal with
sensitive data, such as banking, health services or aircraft communications.
And it is likely that governments sitting on top secret information will also be
early adopters of the technology.

Quantum Networking:
Entanglement and Repeaters
•

WHAT ELSE COULD WE DO WITH THE QUANTUM INTERNET?
•

'Why bother with entanglement?' you may ask. After all, researchers could
simply find ways to improve the "usual" form of QKD.
•

•

Quantum repeaters, for example, could go a long way in increasing
communication distance in fiber-optic cables, without having to go so
far as to entangle qubits.

That is without accounting for the immense potential that entanglement could
have for other applications. QKD is the most frequently discussed example of
what the quantum internet could achieve because it is the most accessible
application of the technology.
•

But security is far from being the only field that is causing excitement
among researchers.

•

The entanglement network used for QKD could also be used, for example, to
provide a reliable way to build up quantum clusters made of entangled qubits
located in different quantum devices.

•

Researchers won't need a particularly powerful piece of quantum hardware to
connect to the quantum internet – in fact, even a single-qubit processor could
do the job.
•

But by linking together quantum devices that, as they stand, have
limited capabilities, scientists expect that they could create a quantum
supercomputer to surpass them all.

Quantum Networking:
Advanced Quantum Computers
• By connecting many smaller quantum devices together, therefore, the quantum internet
could start solving the problems that are currently impossible to achieve in a single
quantum computer.
• This includes expediting the exchange of vast amounts of data and carrying out
large-scale sensing experiments in astronomy, materials discovery, and life
sciences.
• For this reason, scientists are convinced that we could reap the benefits of the
quantum internet before tech giants such as Google and IBM even achieve
quantum supremacy – the moment when a single quantum computer will solve a
problem that is intractable for a classical computer.

• Google and IBM's most advanced quantum computers currently sit around 50 qubits,
which, on its own, is much less than is needed to carry out the phenomenal calculations
needed to solve the problems that quantum research hopes to address.
• On the other hand, linking such devices together via quantum entanglement could
result in clusters worth several thousand of qubits.
• For many scientists, creating such computing strength is in fact the ultimate goal
of the quantum internet project.

Quantum Networking
•

WHAT COULDN'T WE DO WITH THE QUANTUM INTERNET?
•

For the foreseeable future, the quantum Internet could not be used to exchange data in the
way that we currently do on our laptops.

•

Imagining a generalized, mainstream quantum internet would require anticipating a few
decades (or more) of technological advancements. As much as scientists dream of the future
of the quantum internet, therefore, it is impossible to draw parallels between the project as it
currently stands, and the way we browse the web every day.

•

A lot of quantum communication research today is dedicated to finding out how to best
encode, compress and transmit information thanks to quantum states.
•

•

But the type of information that scientists are looking at sending over the quantum internet
has little to do with opening up an inbox and scrolling through emails.
•

•

Quantum states, of course, are known for their extraordinary densities, and scientists
are confident that one node could teleport a great deal of data.

And in fact, replacing the classical internet is not what the technology has set out to
do.

Rather, researchers are hoping that the quantum internet will sit next to the classical Internet,
and would be used for more specialized apps.

•

The quantum internet will perform tasks that can be done faster on a quantum
computer than on classical computers, or which are too difficult to perform even on the
best supercomputers that exist today.

Quantum Networking
•

SO, WHAT ARE WE WAITING FOR?
•

Scientists already know how to create entanglement between qubits and have
even been successfully leveraging entanglement for QKD.

•

China, a long-time investor in quantum networks, has broken records on
satellite-induced entanglement. Chinese scientists recently established
entanglement and achieved QKD over a record-breaking 745 miles.

•

The next stage, however, is scaling up the infrastructure. All experiments so far
have only connected two endpoints. Now that point-to-point communication
has been achieved, scientists are working on creating a network in which
multiple senders and multiple receivers could exchange over the quantum
internet on a global scale.

•

Essentially, the idea is to find the best ways to churn out many entangled
qubits on demand, over long distances, and simultaneously between many
different points. This is much easier said than done: for example, maintaining
the entanglement between a device in China and one in the US would probably
require an intermediate node, on top of new routing protocols.

•

And countries are opting for different technologies when it comes to
establishing entanglement in the first place. While China is picking satellite
technology, optical fiber is the method favored by the US DoE, which is now
trying to create a network of quantum repeaters that can augment the
distance that separates entangled qubits.

• In the US, particles have remained entangled through optical fiber
over a 52-mile "quantum loop" in the suburbs of Chicago, without
the need for quantum repeaters.
• The network will soon be connected to one of the DoE's
laboratories to establish an 80-mile quantum testbed.
• In the EU, the Quantum Internet Alliance was formed in 2018 to
develop a strategy for a quantum internet and demonstrated
entanglement over 31 miles last year.
• For quantum researchers, the goal is to scale the networks up to a
national level first, and one day even internationally.
• The vast majority of scientists agree that this is unlikely to happen
before a couple of decades
•

The quantum internet is without a doubt a very long-term
project, with many technical obstacles still standing in the
way.

• But the unexpected outcomes that the technology will inevitably
bring about on the way will make for an invaluable scientific journey,
complete with a plethora of outlandish quantum applications that,
for now, cannot even be predicted.

Quantum Networking:
Optical Fiber

Quantum Computers
• Quantum computers use atoms to
perform calculations
• Computation depends on principles
of quantum theory
• Qubit: quantum bit
• Superposition of Qubit

• Entanglement of Qubit

34

Features of Quantum Computers

35

Classical bit and Qubit
• The bit is the fundamental concept of classical computation and classical information.
• Quantum computation and quantum information are built upon an analogous concept,
the quantum bit, or qubit for short.
• What is a qubit?
• We’re going to describe qubits as mathematical objects with certain specific properties.
• ‘But hang on’, you say, ‘I thought qubits were physical objects.’
• It’s true that qubits, like bits, are realized as actual physical systems, and we
describe in detail how this connection between the abstract mathematical point of
view and real systems is made.
• However, for the most part, we treat qubits as abstract mathematical objects.
• The beauty of treating qubits as abstract entities is that it gives us the freedom to
construct a general theory of quantum computation and quantum information which
does not depend upon a specific system for its realization.

36

Classical bit and Qubit (Cont.)
• A classical bit is a data element with two values, 0 and 1:
• It can be represented using an almost endless array of physical phenomena; classical
computers typically use charge in active CMOS circuits or the direction of a tiny magnetic field
on a disk drive.
• A qubit is the quantum equivalent of a bit:
• It is represented using either a true two-level system, such as the direction of polarization of a
photon or the direction of spin of an electron, or a pseudo-two-level system, such as two
energy levels of an atom that can be treated as a two-level system.
• Of course, an electron spins in either the “up” or “down” direction, not zero and one; therefore,
we chose to label the two states as our zero and one states, much as we choose e.g. +5 volts to
be a logical one and ground to be a logical zero in classical circuits.

|ψ>

• The difference between a classical bit and a qubit is that a qubit can be in a superposition of the
two states; it can be partially zero and partially one. The state of a qubit can be written as

|ψ> = α|0> + β|1>
where α and β are complex numbers, |α|2 is the probability of finding the qubit in the state
0, and |α|2 + |β|2 = 1: the qubit must be found to be in one state or the other.
37

Classical vs. Quantum Computer

38

Classical Computation vs. Quantum
Computation

39

Qubits

40

41

Qubits Representation in Bloch sphere

42

Mathematical Model of Qubit
Qubit

43

Concept of Qubit

44

Physical
Realizations
of Qubits

45

Classical vs. Quantum Computers Basics
Classical Computer

Quantum Computer

Computer
Science

low charge high charge

IC

Circuit Module Logic gates Transistor

4-bit Classical Register

Quantum Circuit

Q-Chamber

4-qubit Register
• One number
from 0 to 15
at a time

• All 16 numbers in a
superposition allowing
truly parallel computation
• Exponential growth with
addition of each qubit:

46

What is Quantum Computing?

Quantum + Computing = Quantum Computing

A quantum computer is a machine that performs calculations
based on the laws of quantum mechanics, which is the behavior
of particles at the sub-atomic level
47

